This event has been designed to be the most epic encounter on all of Viking. It
does not need to be triggered, you can always just walk up to the dragon. Onyxia
is not aggressive (she is asleep until attacked). Once killed, the dragon does
not respawn for 1 month.

The dragon goes through 3 phases; 1) Onyxia is on the ground, 2) Onyxia is in
the air, and 3) Onyxia is back on the ground.

Each room in the cave tracks the single last direction moved of a non-dragon
living, and Onyxia uses this to decide on a wander-direction if noone is in the
same room as the dragon (the head in phase 1 and 3, and the dragon itself in
phase 2). This means that a tank can actually "pull" the dragon. 

The dragon also has a notion of which direction it is facing, which is the same
direction as its previous move. For ball-spells and knock-backs it is important
to understand this mechanic.


PHASE 1

Onyxia consists of 3 parts, that may (and should) stretch across multiple
rooms. The head has a heavy regular melee attack, and may 1) throw the attacker
out of the room in the direction facing, 2) a heavy bite attack, and 3) cast an
elemental ball that does area damage and flies the direction the dragon is
facing until it explodes when hitting a wall. The body has a medium regular
attack that hits a random target and may cause busy-next-round. Every round the
body also does damage to everyone present. The tail has a heavy regular attack
that hits a random target and either causes heavy bleed (damage over time), or
throws the player out of the room. Every round the tail also does damage to
everyone present.

When fighting Onyxia, someone needs to grab the head and pulls it away from the
others. The remainder of the group then goes on to attack the body. Every player
needs to be alert of a move, because both the head and the tail do VERY HEAVY
damage. Because the head does knock-back, the dragon will move about and the
people attacking the body MUST move accordingly.


PHASE 2

Phase 1 will continue until Onyxia's health reaches 65%. At that point she will
lift off, and enter Phase 2. Note that while she is flying, melee cannot hit
Onyxia, even if they stand underneath her.

In addition to a regular elemental melee attack, Onyxia may 1) perform a
deepbreath, 2) cast an elemental ball similar to phase 1, 3) summon one whelp
per attacker, or 4) summon one guard on a random attacker. The deep-breath is a
special attack that spreads from Onyxia's position out to all adjacent rooms,
and then adjacent to those, etc. until some distance is covered. The deep-breath
fire does HORRIBLE fire damage that WILL kill whoever does not move.


PHASE 3

This phase begins when Onyxia's health reaches 40%. She will land, regain her
abilities from Phase 1, and learn a couple extra. She may now also do 1) call
run_away() in every attacker, 2) frenzy and do 3-5 attacks in one round, and 3)
summon a lava eruption in every attacker's room. The eruption causes fire damage
every round for a few rounds, and simply needs to be avoided by moving the
dragon.


REWARDS

The rewards are obviously outrageous, but I am hoping that QC will approve it
because this is an event that requires just about every active player on the MUD
planning and cooperating. This event is possibly not doable, but it ought to
create a great fellowship among those that try. 

For the basic stats of the dragon see the top part of the std/dragon_base.c
file. The intention here is to decide on max-hp for the dragon based on expected
damage-output of a sufficiently geared player, some set number of players, and
an target fight time. I believe the number right now is 450k hp.

To beat the dragon, it probably requires just about a full uptime gearing up and
collecting heals. Being completely overpowered for the remainder part of the
uptime (at most once a month) should hopefully pass as acceptable.

* A chest filled with 10 million coins worth of random jewels.
* Everyone present at kill gets a no-drop trinket that gives +6 all stats and 
  22 hp and sp regen in __peace_beat.
* Everyone present at kill gets 5 million experience points.
* One auto-loading 22 slot, 1 weight bag.
* One auto-loading dragon's egg that does absolutely nothing (this might come in
  handy later as a cool easter egg (pun intended)).
