Ragnarok

After Balder's untimely death all the goodness withdrew from the
earth letting evil spread over the land.
The bleak Fimbul winter arrived,
raging across the world with a fury that defied the memory of man.
Spring came, but icy winds pinched the young buds and the year's new
shoots failed to penetrate the hard frozen soil.
Throughout the season of summer,
the sun shone only as a feeble white disc,
pale beyond the ever present clouds of falling snow.
Three terrible winters passed without a single day of summer warmth.

Terrible wars were fought,
the like of which had never been seen before.
In all countries, in all kingdoms,
men driven by the needs of the cold fought against one another.
Gaining little or losing all,
still they fought as the unrelenting snows fell.
Man killed man in three long years of battle and strife.
Brother slew brother and father slew son,
the ties of kinship were no more.

Amidst the frozen heavens, Skoll the ravenous wolf rose up
and opening his jaws wide he devoured the sun,
and the moon was likewise consumed by his brother Hati.
Darkness descended upon the earth.
Observing these wonders with questioning eyes,
men saw the stars fall from their alotted positions.
They smashed into the earth and the ground shook,
causing trees to sway and fall. All around the mountains trembled.

Fenris broke free from his bonds,
the magic of the elves having failed at last.
The midgard serpent heaved his tremendous body from the depths of the ocean,
drowning the land with gigantic waves
as cast out a thundering wash of destruction.
Upon the churning waters, the ship Naglfar sailed.
Made from the uncut nails of dead men,
the vessel was steered by Hrym the mighthy giant.

Fenris approached Asgard,
his snarling lips revealing blood-thirsty teeth.
Fire burned brightly in his eyes.
The serpent beside him breathed forth a deluge of venom
filling both the air above and the waters below with an
impenetrable mass of the most deadly poison.

Such was the turmoil that the very heavens were split asunder.
Through the gulf strode the ancient Surtur,
cutting a vast wake of smouldering devastation,
closely followed by his army of fire giants from Muspel.
Above him he wielded his flaming sword which cut through the air
shining brighter than the sun had ever done.
Shadows came shooting from the creature of flame
as the darkness fled before him,
advancing across the bridge Bifrost, its fragile frame shattered
beneath the pounding feet of the giant's army.
It splintered into thousands of mirrored fragments,
each glinting brightly in the blood-red light.

Loki, lusting for the revenge against the gods, rode ahead of the
legions of the dead. In full battle dress they marched pale corpses,
grim-faced beneath ancient iron helmets. Tattered banners and flags
before them, harsh cries rang out from cracked horns.
Spear and sword clashed rythmically agains shield.
Voices sounded in strange tounges
and called out long forgotten battle cries.
Beside the host of Loki, Hrym advanced with all the Hrymthusar,
the ice giants of the North.
On they marched, on to the battlefield of Vigrid.

Seeing the enemy approaching Heimdall grasped the Giallarhorn,
and raising it to his lips blew the alarm,
that perilous note the gods had for ever feared to hear.

Odin hastily took his horse and riding to the Well of Urd
urged the Norns to reveal how to enter into battle
against his foes.

But the Norns were silent, they gave him no answer.
Their faces were concealed and their web lay torn upon the ground.

The great three shook and the earth moved underfoot,
nowhere was safe from the mounting danger.
Odin rushed to the field, his spear in his strong hand,
a gleaming helmet upon his head.
Behind him came the heroes of Valhalla,
resplendent in their bright trappings of war.
The sons of Muspel stood around the edge of the battlefield,
behind them the earth burned in every direction.

Casting his spear over the heads of the evil host,
Odin vibrated his sacred oath for the last time.
The battle began.

Seeking out Fenris his enemy, the father of the gods drew his sword
and engaged him in single combat, bringing cold iron against tooth
and claw.
Thor standing by his side was unable to assist,
as the World Serpent was towering before him.

Frey fought valiantly against Surtur, each striking mighty blows,
but Frey had no sword and eventually he fell before the Flame
Giant's overwhelming strength.

Garm came running from the distant cave of Gnipa. With pounding feet
he rushed at the one-handed Tyr; their fight was fierce.
The two were well-matched and both were slain.

Thor killed the Midgard Serpent, but wearily grasping his wonderous
hammer he was engulfed in the monster's venom.
Staggering back nine paces he collapsed, never to rise again.

Odin fell,
his body broken by the fearsome jaws of the monsterous wolf.
As Fenris howled with the pleasure of victory,
Vidar struck him down, speedily avenging his father's death.
Loki, with his wild-eyed face bereft of all reason,
clambered over the dead and the dying,
delighting in the destruction.
He matched his fiery strenght
against the calm and controlled Heimdall.
Swords clashed, sparks flew, cruel blades cut flesh.
Soon both gods lay dying from their many wounds.

The battle raged. Valkyrs were everywhere,
riding hard upon their galloping steeds,
urging the Einehar on against the relentless attacks
of the army of giants.

Bravely the warriors of Valhalla fought with no thoughts of victory,
striving only to live their final moments of glory to the full.
Their numbers dwindled, gods, men and giants fell by the score.
Pained faces became calms as they greeted death's final release.

The battlefield became still.
Corpses lay stewn in tangled webs of bloody flesh and shattered bones.
Unseeing eyes stared out from cleft skulls.
Hands clung in death to once cherished weapons,
but their owners had little need for them. The fighting was over.
Only Surtur the first born and the fire giants remained,
standing on the battlefield's edge.

Beyond them all was still. No sound, no movement,
no bird or beast to feed upon the carrion;
nothing to disturb the dead.

Surtur passed his hand over the bloody field of death,
spreading fire over the whole earth.
All of creation was consumed by the flames.
