The Imperial Capital of Altdorf
An Overview

By  Arne Dam, Roderic d’Arcon and Alfred Nuñez Jr.
Additional Background by Timothy Eccles and Anthony Ragan


Although no single source of information on Altdorf has been published
by either Games Workshop or (in their brief time as WFRP licensee)
Hogshead Publishing, many Warhammer publications provide a source of
information on the Imperial capital.  Unfortunately, the information
is scattered throughout the various sources and are sometimes
contradictory.

The intent of this article is to provide an overview of Altdorf which
not only encompasses the information that has been published in WFRP
sourcebooks and the various Warhammer novels, but also the various
works of the authors listed above.

While we have no delusions that our efforts will represent the
definitive GW view of Altdorf, we certainly hope that it will be well
received by WFRP Games Masters looking for a concise and detailed view
of the political centre of the Empire.


Arrival at Altdorf

Those who brave the roads leading to Altdorf enter the Imperial
capital through two of its three gates: the West Gate and North Gate.
The lines are typically long as each person or wagon entering the city
is assessed a gate tax of 1 GC per leg.  A fair number of travellers
actually have papers or medallions that exempt them from the gate tax,
including priests and agents of recognised cults (Sigmar, Verena,
Mórr, and Shallya), members of several certain Altdorf guilds (such as
the Merchants’), nobility, licensed coaching lines including their
passengers, and any person granted special privilege in the name of
the Emperor.  Not only do the scribes and excisemen assigned to this
duty have to verify the status of the exempt individuals and the
manifests of the coaches, but they must also record and collect the
taxes from those who must pay.  A team of four to six guards enforce
the law as well as collect any illegal weapons and armour.  Generally,
visitors are only allowed one hand weapon and dagger, everything else
is confiscated (unless the individual has specific authorization given
by the proper city authority).  Those who possess such are given a
receipt for their weapons, which they can collect once they leave the
city.

The third entryway, known as the South or Meadows Gate is the entrance
used by those who reside in the immediate south of the Imperial city.
Like the other gates, traffic through the South Gate is controlled by
the guardsmen and scribes who are stationed here.  Traffic through
this gate is the lightest of Altdorf’s three as there is no proper
road passing beyond the city walls.

Most arrivals come by river boat and enter the city via its harbour.
Scribes and excisemen are accompanied by Marines from the River Patrol
so that they can go about their business registering newly arrived
ships, recording passengers, assessing cargo and levying taxes.
Generally the Docks are a busy place so it is relatively easy for the
undistinguished to slip through the cracks.  In contrast, anyone (say,
so-called adventurer types) wearing armour and carrying weapons other
than a hand weapon and dagger would most likely not be able to slip
through.  Armour and prohibited weapons are confiscated here as they
are at the gates.  Owners of such can retrieve their possessions once
they leave the Imperial capital.



Western Districts of Altdorf

Obereik (Upper Reik) District

The Obereik district is an affluent residential district situated on
the high ground along the northern end of the western bank of the
River Reik.  Many minor nobles from across the Empire, including those
who have achieved substantial success as merchants, make their homes
here.  Some of the ambassadors to the Imperial Court have also found
the Obereik district to their liking.

Baron Frederich von Reichenhall, minor noble from Auerswald and
financier, makes his home in the splendid Reichenhall Mansion [1].
The Baron is ambitious and his constantly searching for ways to
improve his status and expand his power.  He is one of the richest men
in the Empire, a patron of the arts and has great influence at the
Imperial Court.  Still, the Baron is driven. One of his goals is get
his daughter Elise, a vixen in her own right, married into one of the
ruling noble houses.  Some think that the Baron may not be above using
extortion or some other underhanded means to accomplish this goal.

The Estalian Mansion [2] is the official residence of the Ambassador
of the Estalian Kingdom of Astarios, Doña Eleonora Álvarez de Calma.
A raven-haired beauty known for her lavish parties and exquisite gowns
of Arabian silk, Doña Eleonora is the centre of gossip and
speculation.  There are some who whisper about the Estalian’s
unquenchable appetites and boundless energies, while others say that
her Verenan upbringing has made her bold and assertive to the point of
arrogance.  The ambassador has shown no inclination towards marriage
despite her many well-connected and powerful suitors.


Palast (Palace) District

The area to the west and south of Imperial Palace constitutes the
richest district in Altdorf.  Many of the Electors maintain their
Altdorf residence in this district where their servants and retainers
can also perform duties as their master’s or mistress’ spies.  The
more important ministries have their offices as close to the Emperor
as possible.

The Imperial Palace (Kaiserliche Palast) [3] is the most dominant
structure in Altdorf and residence to His Imperial Majesty and
Protector of Sigmar’s Empire, Emperor Karl-Franz I von
Holswig-Schliestein.  Within the Palace is the Volkshalle [3a], the
assembly hall where the Electors gather to conduct the business of the
Empire whenever the need for such a gathering arises, which is fairly
rare.  Most of the time, the Volkshalle is used by the Prime Estates
to carefully study all Imperial edicts, determine the impact on the
respective provinces, and issue a recommendation to their respective
Elector.  For more details about the Prime Estates, refer to Shadows
over Bögenhafen (Hogshead version), page 17.

The Heldenplatz [a] is situated at the northern end of the Palace near
the border of the Obereik and Palast districts.  The Sigmar Monument,
a great case bronze statue of the patron god and founder of the
Empire, dominates the square.

The Kaiserplatz [b] stands at the opposite end of the Palace complex.
The grounds here are generally used whenever the Emperor wishes to
inspect his personal guards and elite knights.  The large square is
also the place where public executions of treasonous criminals take
place for the entertainment of the rabble.  Noble criminals are given
the dignity of being executed within the Palace grounds in front of
their peers.  In addition, tournaments and jousts are occasionally
held here to entertain the nobility of the city as well as any
visiting dignitaries.  Generally, such events are held in the village
of Walfen, northwest of Altdorf on the banks of the Reik.

Bordering the western side of the Kaiserplatz, the Imperial Guard
Barracks & Armoury (Hofgarde) [4] is the quarters of the Emperor’s
elite troops and the scene of some tension.  Recently, Emperor
Karl-Franz I created the Order of the High Helms, a unit of Knights
whose members major requirement was that they must be over 6 feet
tall.  The Emperor then ordered the Imperial Guards to set aside a
portion of their barracks for this new Order.  The Imperial Guards
reluctantly complied and situated the High Helms to the section
closest to the latrines.  The Imperial Guard are rather anxious to see
the Emperor’s new pets prove their worth on the battlefield.

On the opposite side of the enormous edifice housing the Imperial
Guard Barracks, the Imperial Chancellery (Kaiserliches Kanzleiamt) [5]
is the both the Imperial Counting House and Mint.  Few people are
allowed admittance to the Treasury and any loiters are quickly chased
off by the guards or one of the frequent Watch patrols.  The
Chancellor and Keeper of the Imperial Counting House, Mornan Tybalt,
makes his offices here.  Herr Tybalt is also a member of the Council
of State.

To the west of the Palace stands a short and squat tower with
beast-faced gargoyles glaring down at any who approach.  Surrounded by
a walled courtyard the Tower of the Amber College [6] is generally
left abandoned by its masters as it is only the symbolic centre of
this sorcerous discipline.  For more information on the Amber College,
see Realms of Sorcery, pages 49-50.



Amtsbezirk (Civic District)
 
The Amtsbezirk runs along west bank of Reik from the Obereik District
and north of the Emperor’s Bridge to the Three Toll Bridge.  A large
number of governmental ministries and other bodies have their offices
in this district.  A number of influential nobles also make their
residence among the few enclaves of townhouses found in this district.

Tower Prison (Schuldturm) [7] is one of several prisons in Altdorf and
generally houses those who are debt-ridden, but well-connected enough
to ensure that they have some comforts during their incarceration.
Such considerations are rather costly and may, in the end, put off the
inevitable.  Those prisoners who can no longer arrange to pay for
their stay in this prison may find themselves transferred to Mundsen
Keep (see below).

The Emperor Karl-Franz Bridge [c] is the northernmost of the Altdorf
bridges on the Reik and connects Amtsbezirk to the University
district.  Heads of those executed for treason decorate the bridge as
a warning to others of like mind.

The well-guarded and fortified building east of the Imperial Palace is
the Bitterhof [8], the residence of the Emperor’s current Lord
Chamberlain, the old and still powerful Graf Otto von Bitternach.
Known as the Iron Graf, von Bitternach is the Emperor’s chief diplomat
and a member of the Council of State. According to rumours he has a
whole net of spies across The Empire going by the name the
Schattenaugen (Shadow Eyes) whose chief task is to gather “sensitive”
information.  It is said that the real business of the Empire is
conducted in his offices in the Imperial Palace.  Many emissaries from
the other Imperial provinces and foreign lands spend a good portion of
their day at the von Bitternach’s offices, the centre of Imperial
diplomatic corps, pressing their respective master’s issues and
concerns.

The Judiciary Scriptorium and Secretarium (Magistratsamt) [9] stands
between the Imperial Counting House and the Reik.  All legal records
concerning Reikland and Imperial matters are kept under lock and key
here as are those whose duty it is to copy the large volumes of case
law for use by the Magistrates, their clerks, and certain license
lawyers.  As with other government institutions, the Secretarium would
rather maintain the “old ways” of doing things rather than using the
much cheaper and more efficient printing presses that can be found in
other parts of Altdorf.

The Imperial Courts of Justice (Kaiserlicher Gerichshof) [10] are
located in a large building near Three Toll Bridge along the banks of
the Reik.  The court here is usually the site for cases involving the
Nobility where the accused is judged by a jury of their noble peers.
Court cases that have to do with charges of treason against the
Emperor or the murder (assassination) of a noble are assigned to these
courts.  Imperial justice is said to be swift and many a criminal end
their days in either one of the Altdorf prisons or at the business end
of a gallows.  The latter are usually erected in either the
Kaiserplatz (see above) or Königplatz (see below).  Trials that
concern commoners and their petty grievances against a noble are first
tried at the Altdorf Courthouse (see below) where many are dismissed
for lack of “proper” evidence.  The five Supreme Magistrates of
Altdorf have their offices within the Imperial Courts.  The most
senior, Magistrate Leopold von Waldersee, is also a member of the
Council of State.

Judicial Square (Richten Platz) [d] lies at the northwest corner of
the Imperial Courts.  Agitators and demagogues are banned by law from
practicing their nuisance craft here upon pain of imprisonment and
fine.

Sometimes referred to as the Ostlander Bridge, Three Toll Bridge [e]
connects Temple Street (Tempelstrasse) to Luitpoldstrasse and Street
of a Hundred Taverns (see below).  It is the widest bridge in Altdorf
and one of the more heavily patrolled by the City Watch.  The
Hangman’s Tavern [11] is one of the establishments on Three Toll
Bridge.  Many of the legal establishment frequent the tavern which
gets it name from the old practice of hanging river pirates and
smugglers from the bridge.


Domplatz (Cathedral) District

The Domplatz encompasses the area surrounding Cathedral of Sigmar.
Most of the priesthood have their residences in this neighbourhood in
order to be as close to the internal politics of the cult as possible.

The Great Cathedral of Sigmar [12] is the largest temple in the
Empire.  Its octagonal shape is typical of Sigmarite temples, with
each side representing the united eight tribes at the time of the
Goblin Wars and the founding of the Empire.  The Grand Theogonist
makes his home within the temple as does the Lector of Altdorf.  There
are a number of cells beneath the temple where lesser members of the
clergy live.  The Great Library of the Cathedral is located in a
massive underground vault, inaccessible to all but the highest echelon
of the cult and their authorised agents.  Services are held daily and
the Cathedral remains open for the pious throughout the day and night.

The Chapter House of the Order of the Fiery Heart (Tempel Haus) [13]
stands to the north of the Cathedral and is the residence and hall of
Sigmar’s Knights.  The Grandmaster generally only spends six months in
Altdorf and the rest of the year at the Order’s Fischadler Castle on
the outskirts of the Imperial Capital.  Typically, there are no more
than 10 knights in Altdorf along with the Order’s men-at-arms and
support staff.

Tempelstrasse [f] runs from Three Toll Bridge around the southern end
of the Cathedral to the Templeplatz (see below) and Kaiserplatz (see
above).  It is one of the busier streets on this side of the Reik.

To the southeast of the Cathedral stands Tempelgarten [g], a place of
tranquillity for those who find such among the trees and plants.
Within the park is the Priest’s Rest [14], a tavern frequented by the
Sigmarite clergy.  A small shrine to Taal and Rhya on the south side
of the tavern is maintained by those who honour the two gods.  There
is a belief that the park is all that remains of an ancient rove
sacred to Taal.  The area around the shrine is said to be haunted by a
young woman whose ghost appears just before the rising of the Altdorf
fog.  Some rumours have it that she was an innocent burnt at the stake
by zealous witch-hunters during the Wizards’ War.  Some believe that
the spirit is far older and may be the manifestation of Dyrath, the
ancient goddess of fertility (who some theologians speculate is just a
representation of Rhya).

Along Tempelstrasse, near Three Toll Bridge stands the Vagr Breughel
Memorial Playhouse [15] where many of the playwright Detlef Sierck’s
productions are performed.  The theatre is said to be haunted, but
there hasn’t been any reported incidences in the past few years.  The
rival Geheimnisstrasse Theatre [16] is located nearby and features
plays by the incomparable Tarradasch.

The Pious Pilgrim's Boarding House [17] is located between the two
theatrical rivals and is the residence of many visiting Sigmarite
priests and scholars.  Most of these individuals spend their time
either attending or teaching at the nearby Collegium Sigismundae [18].
The school caters exclusive to those individuals who aspire to the
Sigmarite priesthood.  Initiates and newly ordained priests from all
over the country attend this school provided they have obtained
sufficient funds from their sponsors.


Reikmarkt

One of the smallest districts in the city, the Reiksmarkt is nestled
on the west bank of the Reik between Domplatz and Süderich districts.
The district is also the site of the Reikmarkt [h], the largest market
in Altdorf west of the Reik, near the terminus of the Sigmar Bridge
[i].  Many of the stewards of the noble households purchase the
majority of their masters’ provisions at the Reikmarkt.

Located on the bank of the Reik, the Celestial College [19] is one of
the oddest and tallest structures in the city.  Its tall, thin
dome-topped towers rise up into Altdorf’s skyline before they branch
into many smaller towers.  Rumours abound that should Taal get tired
of the offensive structure, he might give Altdorf one good shake just
to see the college come tumbling down.  For more information on the
Celestial College, see Realms of Sorcery, pages 39-40.

The Imperial Opera House [20] is largest building in the district and
has been recently renovated.  The opera is a relatively new arrival to
Altdorf.  It was introduced from Tilea by way of Nuln during the last
years of Emperor Luitpold’s reign.  The building’s new construction
reflects the importance its wealthy patrons place on their personal
entertainment.  Performances are quite expensive, which increases the
appeal of attending as the prices keep the low-born (and low incomed)
people out.


Oberhausen

The Oberhausen district is one of southern districts on the west bank
and stretches from the Reikmarkt in the east to the west wall.  It
borders the Domplatz in the north and the smaller Süderich to the
south.  Many affluent families, including a number of non-noble
government officials, have townhouses in this district.

The Templeplatz Watch Station [21] is the main Barracks of the Altdorf
Watch and located in the western section of the Oberhausen overlooking
the Templeplatz [j].  This is where the Watch Marshal has his office
and what passes as the elite Watch is quartered when not on patrol
pushing around the less well-off and licking the boots of their
superiors.  People accused of serious or capital crimes are held here
until arrangements for their stay at one of the Altdorf prisons can be
finalized.  The Elite Watch escorts the cart carrying these alleged
criminals to their more permanent imprisonment.

The Temple of Morr [22] is the centre of worship for the God of the
Dead in Altdorf. The jet-black building contains dormitories, cells,
and a refectory for the novices, acolytes and priests in addition to a
temple, a chapel, and Temple Father Knock’s apartments, all of which
are built around a central cloister. The clergy mainly consists of
initiates training to become priests in Reikland and the neighbouring
provinces. Burials of the rich and the mighty take place from here,
while all the rest are buried directly from the chapels, usually the
one in Morr Town further east.

The College of Heraldry [23] has recently been relocated to more
spacious quarters from its old, dilapidated site just a few streets
away.  Klaus von Rotterfach, noble and former Imperial Herald, is a
stern master who brooks no interference from officials in other
governmental ministries.  The records contained herein are impeccably
maintained and no one is allowed to peruse these other than Baron von
Rotterfach or one of his more senior (and trusted) assistants.  Anyone
who wishes information must have the appropriate authorisations or a
great deal of gold crowns.  Should they lack either, the petitioner
will be turned away.

The Imperial [24] is considered one of the higher class hostelries and
is often used by the entourage of the northern Provincial Electors
whenever their master personally attends the Imperial Court.

The Royal Conservatory (Hof Konservatorium) [25] is located near the
approach to Sigmar Bridge.  Some of the younger children of the city’s
elite attend this school of music where they learn from some of the
Empire’s must gifted masters.  Performances are held once a week to
help pay the instructors’ wages.  Admission is priced so that only the
elite can afford to attend.

The Ulthuan Embassy [26] is situated close to the Royal Conservatory.
Established after the Great War Against Chaos, the relations between
the Empire and Ulthuan have been fairly cordial, except for the years
during and shortly after Marienburg’s independence.  Officially, the
Empire recognises Ulthuan’s suzerainty over the Wood Elves of the
Laurelorn to the north, though no one has seem to bother telling the
“rustic cousins” of this development.  This official recognition is a
sore point with Middenland and Nordland as both see Ulthuan as little
more than interlopers in their region.  When not at official functions
requiring his attendance, Ambassador Tymalier Eskeladel is usually
found within the embassy.  There are times when the High Elf emissary
departs with several Ulthuan guards through the south gate to wander
in the nearby forest in order to escape the stench of the Imperial
capital and its uncouth human inhabitants.


Süderich

The Süderich is the southernmost district on the Westside and rivals
the Reikmarkt in size.  Some affluent merchants and scholars, mostly
middle-class, make their residence in the few townhouses that can be
found in this district.

The Marketplatz [k] is another of the many markets in Altdorf and
specialises in the selling of fish.  Servants from the households on
this side of the Reik would rather come to this market rather than
brave the other such market in the Docks area (see below).

The Physicians’ Guild has given its guildhall the rather lofty name of
the Collegium Medicinae [27].  As expected, the Guild takes full
responsibility to train would-be applicants in order to ensure the
quality and character of those admitted.  In other words, the Guild
will ensure that any they take in will place the welfare of the Guild
and its leaders above all else and, secondarily, ensuring that they
will serve their wealthy clientele to the best of their abilities.
Characters who wish to apply to the Collegium Medicinae had better
make sure that their references are impeccable and funding secured.

The largest building in the Süderich is Graustein Keep [28], which is
used as a prison housing those accused or convicted of serious (though
not capital) crimes.  Some of those who leave after serving their time
are broken men who refuse to speak of their experiences as a prisoner
in the keep.

The Hospice Priory of Shallya [29] provides shelter as well as a place
to pray for Shallyans in the city as well as their fellows on
pilgrimage from other parts of the Empire.  Priestess Natascha de
Beaumont is the ranking cleric of the Temple of Shallya (see below)
who spends a great deal of time at the Hospice.  The Priestess is a
kind soul who has seen enough of the world to be wary of certain
transients (i.e. self-styled adventurers) who seek assistance, usually
medical, without giving anything of substance in return.  Priestess de
Beaumont generally prefers service from these petitioners rather than
monetary contributions.

Mourners’ Bridge [l] stretches across the Reik and connects Süderich
to the southern edges of the Reikerbahn district and Mórr’s Town (see
below).  It’s the southernmost of Altdorf’s bridges.


North of the Talabec


Reikhoch

This district is a rather small one located in the nothernmost portion
on east bank of Reik, west of University district.  The houses here
are old compared to other parts of the city and rather expensive.

There are a number of cemeteries on the east bank of the Reik.
Ruhstatt Cemetery (Burgher's Cemetery) [30] is an older, now mostly
unused, cemetery with many tombstones and crypts to mark the graves of
the privileged from centuries before.  As with all graveyards, there
is a Chapel of Mórr on the premises.  There are also rumours of secret
tunnels connecting a number of the older crypts, but these are
dismissed by Friedhelm Ahnwacht, the Priest of Mórr from the temple
across the Reik who is in charge of the chapel.


Friedwang

Another small district, the Friedwang is located between the Northern
gate and University district.  A number of scholars from the
University and successful merchants make their home in this quaint
district.

The Temple of Verena [31] stands out with its Tilean-style
architecture and marble columns.  Justus Veltins is the ranking priest
of Verena in Altdorf and prefers to avoid the politics of the Imperial
Court whenever possible.  Justus spends some of his time teaching law
at the University, though he knows that justice under the Sigmarite
law courts are more influenced by Sigmarite dogma than Verenan
enlightenment.

The nearby Public Library [32] is administered by the Temple of Verena
and is opened to the public for a small fee (roughly 5 shillings a
visit).  The Librarian, Adalbert Buchhalter, is a minor priest who is
very protective (to the point of obsession) of the books in his care.
All books are chained to their proper place for general viewing.
Should anyone linger too long out of his sight, Adalbert will send one
of his assistants to investigate.  If need be, Adalbert is willing to
use the club he keeps nearby to chase off any who seek to damage the
books.  Should any books of a dubious nature come to his possession,
Adalbert will send these to the vault at the Temple where they are
with limited access.

A cluster of buildings near the northern gate of Altdorf with a large
pyramid at its centre marks the Light College [33].  The surrounding
buildings themselves house the wizards, acolytes, and servants of the
college.  The smooth-faced, white-marble pyramid has only one entrance
and only the foolish seek to enter it.  For more information on the
Light College, see Realms of Sorcery, pages 47-49.


University District

The University district follows the east bank of Reik from Karl-Franz
Bridge to Three Toll Bridge.  It lies to the north of Street of a
Hundred Taverns (see below) to Königplatz.  Many minor nobles make
their homes near the riverfront, while students of wealthy parents
make their residences closer to the University.  The district gets a
bit more unsettled closer to the Docks.

Anyone arriving to Altdorf from the north, especially if they travel
by coach, will first experience the sights and sounds of Altdorf when
they arrive at the Königplatz [m].  By law, the coaching lines must
deposit their passengers at this square where they can be assaulted by
hawkers who seek to direct the newly-arrived towards certain inns.
Entertainers – and other unsavoury fellows – also wander the square
seeking to separate visitors from the coins in their purse.  In
addition, one can find town criers ringing their bells whilst
announcing the Emperor’s latest edicts and spreading general news and
gossip.  If one is really lucky, a public execution might well be
taking place.  This form of entertainment could be as simple as a
heretic burning to something more extravagant as the drawing and
quartering of a felon.  If no such is taking place, visitors to the
square can still take heart, there are always people in the stocks at
whom one can hurl rotten fruit and vegetables.

Though on the Königplatz, the Temple of Shallya [34] does not have
windows or portals facing the square.  Clearly, the cult has no wish
to witness the public display of capital or other punishments that
take place in the Königplatz.  It also seems that they do not have the
political clout to have such relocated elsewhere in the city much less
abolished.

The University of Altdorf [35] dominates the district and is the
centre of Reiklander scholarship.  The University ranks high as a
place of learning alongside similar institutions in Middenheim, Nuln,
and rebellious Marienburg.  Many prominent Imperial scholars have
their offices at the University and its various schools and colleges
have a number of restricted libraries.  One of the most well-known
colleges at the University is the Collegium Historica.  Led by the
esteemed Aleistus Schliemann – Historian and Chief Curator – the
Collegium Historica oversees the Royal Imperial Museum and is a chief
sponsor of the Imperial Geographic Society, both of which are located
at the University.  The University is also home to the Guild of
Explorers.

Within the University is a place known as Ruckusplatz or Commotion
Square.  It’s also referred to as Speaker’s Corner and is
traditionally used by Agitators to whip up impressionable students,
especially those with generous access to the parents’ wealth.

The charter of the Altdorf Wizards’ and Alchemists’ Guild [36] –
formerly known as the Guild of Apothecaries – was revised by Emperor
Wilhelm II when he realised that the Colour Colleges of Magic
recruited most of their apprentices from the Magical Guilds and
colleges of Middenheim, Nuln, and even Talabheim.  Wilhelm was
determined that the great Imperial capital should have its own Guild
for the training and development of native Reiklander wizards, as well
as any who wish to someday serve in the Emperor’s armies.  The Altdorf
Guild is still relatively small and not quite up to par with its
rivals from the other Imperial cities, but it is growing in prestige.

For those individuals eager to learn Surgery, the nearby Barbers’
Guild [37] is constantly seeking qualified applicants.  A number of
its members are employed by the Reikland army as the Surgeons from the
Guild are less judgmental about the necessity of war than any healer
affiliated with the cult of Shallya.

The College of Noble Sorcery [38] is spread among several townhouses
located on Westenstrasse.  Its students are more noted for their
affluent connections – especially to their parents’ purse – than their
abilities in the mystic arts.  Many can be found drinking and
carousing in the local taverns.  For more information on the College
of Noble Sorcery, see Realms of Sorcery, pages 88-89.

The current site of the Gold College [39] is not the one where it was
originally founded by Teclis.  As the college has grown wealthier, the
higher echelon decided that a move to a For more information on the
Gold College, see Realms of Sorcery, pages 44-46.

Nothing of the Jade College [40] can be seen from the street other
than its high unornamented walls.  Its narrow gates are generally
closed, though the guards inside will answer (through a shuttered slit
in the gate) to any inquiries from those who either are curious or
seek admittance.  In the case of the latter, several visits with
responses to questions may be required before being allowed within.
For more information on the Jade College, see Realms of Sorcery, pages
46-47.

At first glance, one would mistake the Grey College [41] for an old,
crumbling stone building in desperate need of destruction.  Its
ivy-covered walls hide some of the missing stones and its dilapidated
tower looks as if it is an accident waiting to happen.  For more
information on the Grey College, see Realms of Sorcery, pages 40-43.


Bankbezirk (Bankers’ District)

The Bankbezirk is the centre of Altdorf’s commerce and lies east of
the Middenheim Road and the Königplatz.  Not surprisingly, many
merchants and traders make their homes in this mercantile district.
Banking companies are also situated in the Bankbezirk.

Located near the North Gate, the Fuhrmarkt [n] is a traditional
farmers’ and livestock market that is held during the morning hours.
Servants from the districts north of the Talabec flock here to obtain
provisions and goods for the household of their masters.  Many traders
operate booths and selling their merchandise from mid-morning onwards.
Anyone seeking gossip, news, and rumours can do worse than mingle with
the crowds at this market.

The Association of Coachmen [42] is little more than the building that
houses the offices of the coaching companies – Four Seasons, Cartak
Lines, and Ratchett Lines – that serve Altdorf and their maintenance
yards and stables.  The companies are bitter competitors.  Their
offices were once located in different parts of the Altdorf, but city
officials had enough of the “raids” each waged against the others
(humorously called the “Coaching Wars”) that an ordinance was passed
forcing the three to cohabitate.  The Four Seasons is the newest of
the coaching lines and is slowly bleeding the other two of their
business.

The Imperial Mercantile Bank [43] provides its customers with banking
services and as functions as a stock exchange.  There are some who
consider depositing their money at the bank as being little different
than throwing it away in a game of dice, but for most people it’s
safer than keeping coins in the mattress – or pile of bug-infested
straw – at one’s home.

The Altdorf Council Hall [44] is the centre of the city’s
administration. It contains offices for the three Burgomeisters and
their secretaries as well as the City Records which is constantly
quarrelling with the Judiciary Secretarium over jurisdiction. It is
also the home of the Altdorf Courthouse where most of the legal cases
in Altdorf are tried.  The majority are presided over by a tribunal of
three magistrates, though there are cases of misdemeanour where one
magistrate is often enough to render judgement.  In circumstances
where the proper jurisdiction is in question in other parts of the
Reikland, the court case will be referred to here.  Reiklander justice
is said to be final and only in extreme situations will an appeal of a
ruling from this courthouse be accepted by the Imperial Courts.  As
with the Imperial Courts, many a criminal found guilty will end their
days in either one of the Altdorf prisons or at the business end of a
gallows.  Those convicted here of capital crimes are executed in the
Königplatz (see above) to the delight of the crowd.

The Association of Financiers & Moneylenders [45] is located in a
different part of the district from the Bank. By statute, this is an
obvious attempt to create some separation between the moneygrubbers
and all that money.  Members of this association include Baron
Frederich von Reichenhall and the Steinhäger brothers, Franz and
Heinrich, (Shadows over Bögenhafen, Hogshead version, page 64), as
well as representatives of the Marienburg Merchant Houses such as van
der Kuypers, Fooger, and van Haagan (Marienburg: Sold down the River,
pages 30-32).

In order to keep an eye on the financiers and moneylenders, the
Merchants’ Guild [46] is located in the same building with the
Association.  Gossip on the street is that there is no love lost
between the Guild and Association.  Still, many of the Merchant
families from both Reikland and Marienburg have representatives in
this Guild as well.  To further complicate matters, the Merchant Guild
is rumoured to be divided into two camps.  One faction is led by
Guildmaster Gustavus Seidehandler, who is said to believe that a new
era in the Empire is soon coming where the rising merchant classes
eclipse the declining nobility in both financial power and political
prestige.  The other, more conservative faction is led by the
influential Baron Manfred von Klaus and looks towards a more
constructive relationship between the merchants and nobility.  So far,
the differences have remained in the backrooms of the Guild.  It’s
anyone’s guess as to how long such manoeuvring will remain there.

Located on Münzestrasse [o], Foogerhaus [47] is the Altdorf office of
Marienburger Director Arkat Fooger (Marienburg:Sold down the River,
pages 87-88).  His representative in the City is Karstin Largsdottir
(Dwarfs: Stone & Steel, page 97-98). Karstin is a member of the
Altdorf Merchant Guild, but she has resisted any attempt to place her
in any of the two factions that threaten to split the Guild.  As with
any other influential and affluent individual in Altdorf, Karstin is
not above hiring agents to look after Herr Fooger’s many interests.


The Docks

The Docks is officially known as the Niederhafen district and a place
where many visitors to Altdorf lose their wealth, their way, and
sometimes their life.  The neighbourhood is rather impoverished from
the perspective of the locals, but through it passes much of the trade
that is Altdorf’s lifeblood.  The Docks is also the centre of
Altdorf’s more notorious forms of entertainment and its dark and
narrow alleys the scene of many crimes.

The major attraction in the district is the Street of a Hundred
Taverns [p] - sometimes even called the Street of a Thousand Taverns
by boasting locals.  There are a number of places along the street
where one can get himself roaring drunk.  The more commonly known
taverns are The Three Emperors, Drunken Bastard, Knight’s Hovel, Seven
Stars, and Griffon’s Pothole.  Should a visitor seek a place of
lodging, they could do worse than the Cat and Fiddle, Wayfarer’s Rest,
and Sailor and the Lady.  For the affluent, there are the private
clubs such as Hart’s Lodge and the Crescent Moon. The exact location
of the latter is a secret, which is probably for the better, since
rumour has it that the members have been blessed by the Dark Kiss.

Some establishments specialise in special forms of entertainment of
services.  Should a patron wish to attend a cabaret, they could drop
by The Gamesman or Black Velvet during one of their respective shows.
The Ruddy Wench and Crown and Two Chairmen are two establishments
which cater to those seeking companionship for the night, though the
Crooked Spear provides the same service to a different clientele.
Gamblers who wish to try their luck at cards or dice tend to visit the
Von Neuwald Arms or Tumbling Bones.  Individuals who prefer diversions
such as bear-baiting or pit fighting tend to congregate at
establishments like Gladiators or Fangs and Claws.  Fanciers of
weirdroot and similar mind-altering substances tend to make their way
to Bruno’s Brewhouse or the Breasts of Myrmidia.  Those who are
foolish enough to desire contact with the less savoury elements in
Altdorf will generally be drawn to the Holy Hammer of Sigmar or A Cut
Above.

The Freudenhaus [48] is a bordello located behind some of the taverns
on the Street of a Hundred Taverns.  It is well known as a place where
every whim and desire can be found.

Volker Weg [q], which many have nick-named the Street of Many Taverns,
intersects the Street of a Hundred Taverns at the Königplatz.  It is
not the centre of Altdorf’s entertainment as the Hundred Taverns, but
it does have its share of tavern and inns where the more discreet
frequent.  The Parrot and Pig and Cowardly Tilean are two locations of
the many establishments where traders in information meet to exchange
rumours and news.  The situation on this street is more appealing as
patrols from the Luiptoldstrasse Watch station are considerably less
frequent here than on the Streets of a Hundred Taverns.

The Luitpoldstrasse [r] runs along the docks and connects the southern
ends of the Street of a Hundred Taverns and Street of Many Taverns.
Along this stretch, one can find a number of other points of interest.

One particular point of interest is the new Dock Watch Station [49].
The old station was burnt down a few years ago in one of Altdorf’s
recent riots.  Instead of rebuilding on that spot, the Watch was
allowed to relocate a few doors to the west.  Holding cells are
located below the facility and tend to get a bit damp and mouldy
whenever the river rises a few feet.  Prisoners stay only as long as
it takes to arrange an escort to one of Altdorf’s prisons.

The Harbourmaster (Hafenmeisterei) [50] is located nearby.  In the
upper floor of this two-storied building, records of the arrivals and
departures of ships – as well as any taxes collected – are maintained
by clerks and excisemen.  Given the grand way the Harbourmaster
Norbert Brüggen lives in his townhouse in the University district, one
might conclude that the books shown the Chancellor of the Exchequer
are not quite the same as Lord Brüggen keeps in the secured vaults in
his office. The River Patrol Barracks are located on the first floor,
which provides some security for the Lord Harbourmaster.  Another part
of the building is used for the offices of Minister Count Siegfried
von Walfen, cousin to Emperor Karl-Franz I and a member of the Council
of State.  As one of his duties as Minister, Count von Walfen is the
head of the Imperial River Patrol, which in reality only covers the
rivers within the Reikland.  Other chapters of the Imperial River
Patrol are licensed for a fee to act as agents for the Empire.

The centre of the district is dominated by the Fischmarkt [s].  This
large square not only hosts the daily fish market, but also has a
number of buildings bordering it.  Within the middle of the square,
the Chapel of Manaan [51] is a place where those who work the Reik –
boatmen, fishermen, and the like – can pay homage to the God of the
Reik.  Within the Chapel, there is also a small shrine to the God of
Rivers, Karog.

Several other notable places can be found on the periphery of the
Fischmarkt.  The Fischbrat Haus is a restaurant which specialises in
baked and fried fish.  The Boatman Inn and Unke’s Spelunke are places
patronised by those who make their living on the rivers as well as
those working the docks.  Brawls are a regular event at these
establishments and form a sort of interactive entertainment.  At the
north end, those in desperate straits conducted business with
Pfandleih Haus, a pawnbroker of some (mostly ill) repute in the Docks.

The Rivermen’s Association [52] is located on eastern side of the
Fischmarkt.  Anyone plying their livelihood on the Rivers Reik and
Talabec are well-advise to join this association. Guildmaster Bruno
Dönitz and his cronies patrol the Docks looking for any unfamiliar
face.  Any who are not familiar are pressed to join the Guild.  Those
who look like rivermen, but refuse to join may well be beaten by Herr
Dönitz and his men or have their ship vandalized.  Some have even been
known to disappear for a time before their bodies resurface somewhere
downriver.

The Stevedores’ and Teamsters’ Guild [53] is located near the Street
of Many Taverns at the northern terminus of the Old Emperor Bridge
(sometimes called the Ostlander Bridge) [t], which connects the
Niederhafen district to the Reikerbahn.  Like the Rivermen, the
Stevedores and Teamsters don’t look very kindly on any non-member
doing work along the Docks.  It is said that Guildmaster Karl Heilmann
has a third (if not half) of the Dock Watch under his control.  Many
of these are used to identify non-Guild members who are undertaking
Guild work so that Herr Heilmann’s thugs can pay a visit to these
people in the dead of the night for “frank discussions.”

Numerous trading companies have their offices in the Docks, one of the
more notable and comparatively successful being the Reik-Talabec
Trading Company [54].  This company is located near the warehouses
that line the River Talabec.


Werksviertel (Niederwind)

The Werksviertel district lies south of the Bankbezirk district and
between Metallschlack and Niederhafen districts on the north bank of
the River Talabec.  This district is the heart of the manufacturing
district of Altdorf and contains a number of working class tenements.

Located on Schrägkruez Strasse [u], Starr’s Funeral Parlour [55] is
one of many funeral parlours scattered throughout the city.  Its
proprietor, Johann Starr, is a member of the Mourners’ Guild and
certified to prepare the deceased for their final rest.  A cold
storage room below is used to store the bodies until a Priest of Mórr
can retrieve them for their final rest.  A protective glyph of Mórr is
placed on the lintel of the doorway to keep out those who seek to
disturb the dead.

Though looking a bit dingy and rundown in a nearby alley, Hengt's Book
Shoppe [56] is a goldmine for those who investigate the unusual.  Many
rare and strange books can be found in the untidy shelves and unkempt
piles throughout the shop, if one has the time and determination to
search.  The owner, Adolf Hengt, has a good deal of obscure knowledge
that he’s willing to impart for a price.  Unknown to most, Adolf
traffics in forbidden texts which he keeps in very safe and secret
hiding places in his shop.

The intersection of Schrägkruez Strasse and Schwarzwasser Strasse [v]
is called Talabecplatz [w] by the locals.  Many of the clothiers along
Schwarzwasser participate in the market that operate in the square as
do many of the artisans in the district.  The market is usually opened
on Wellentag, Aubentag, and Festag.

The Altdorf Press [57] is one of the older printer establishments in
the Imperial capital having been founded during the reign of Emperor
Mattheus II, grandfather of Karl-Franz.  The Altdorf Press was given
tax-exempt status by Mattheus II in exchange for launching a daily
news-letter called the Altdorf Spieler for those citizens who were
able to read.  This was one of the few successful acts that the late
Emperor was able to institute in his failed bid to bring more
“democracy” to the Empire.  The Altdorf Press is also famous for a
series of books depicting the obviously fictional adventures of a
self-styled adventure named Felix Jaeger and his rather odd companion
Gotrek Gurnisson.

The Masons’ Guild [58] is one of the more influential guilds in
Altdorf and, given the current work improving the city walls of
Altdorf, one of the busiest.  Dwarfs are well represented in the
Guild’s membership.  In fact, the Mason Guildmaster, Turbruk
Greyhammer, is rumoured to be over 250 years old and a veteran of the
Great War Against Chaos.

Kürten’s Leatherworks and Tannery (Lederei) [59] has moved most of its
tanning operations out of the city in accordance to the “Stench” Act
of 2506, which ordered all such operations out of Altdorf.  The
various tanneries and slaughterhouses have set up their operations
north of the city on the banks of the Reik.  Alois Kürten moved his
tanning operations as well, and expanded his leatherworks operations
in the city.

Located near the border with the Metallschlack district on
Hammerstrasse [x], the Reik Steel and Iron Foundry (Reiksstahl
Giesserei) [60] is the largest of its kind in Altdorf and processes
iron ore from the Grey Mountains into iron bars and other products for
use by those who work such into finished products.  The Dwarf and
Imperial Engineer Guilds, see below, are among the largest buyers.
Helmut Tegelmann is the crusty overseer who doesn’t take kindly to
slackers.

The neighbouring Faltzer Metalworks [61] is a large facility which
specialises in taking the ore from other types of metal and blending
them into alloys, such as pewter and bronze, for use by those who work
these into more finished products.

The Eastender Bridge [y] is the easternmost bridge in Altdorf and the
bridge that more workers in the Werksviertal cross to return to their
residences in the Sindelfingen district (see below)


Metallschlack

The Metallschlack district is the easternmost north of the Talabec and
borders the Bankbezirk district (north) and the Werksviertal (or
Niederwind) district (west).  The district is also referred to as the
Dwarf Quarter for the number of Dwarfs living there.  It is by no
means an exclusive Dwarf district, though many of the taverns in the
district are run by the Dwarfs.  In fact, some of the best ale in all
of Altdorf can be found in the Metallschlack district.

The Dwarf Engineer Guildhouse [62] is a large building located on
Eisenschlacke Weg [z].  It is rumoured that a good portion of the
Guild has been built below ground by the secretive – and rather
paranoid – Dwarfs.  The sounds of work generally carry on until late
in the night.  For more information on the Dwarf Engineer Guild in
Altdorf (and the Empire), see Dwarfs: Stone & Steel, pages 17-18 and
Warpstone #20.

The Karaz Ankor Embassy [63] is located near the Dwarf Engineers
guild.  The Guild isn’t pleased with this as they believe the location
was chosen so that some influential elements of Karaz-a-Karak (namely
the Dwarf Engineer Guildmaster and his cronies) could keep an eye on
the Expatriate Dwarf Guild.  Matters are not helped by the fact that
Ambassador Prince Montrak Ironhelm, a clansman of the High King,
treats the Expatriates with little respect as if they aren’t proper
Dwarfs.  From the perspective of the Embassy, the Expatriates are
Dwarfs who do not understand their obligations to the High King and
who benefit immeasurably from the sacrifice of their kin in the Worlds
Edge Mountains.  Of course, the Embassy has the same view regarding
the ungrateful Dwarfholds outside Karaz Ankor.  For more information
on Karaz Ankor and the Dwarfholds of the Dwarf Empire, see Dwarfs:
Stone & Steel, pages 26-34.

The Imperial Engineer Guildhouse [64] is located across from the Reik
Steel and Iron Foundry (see above).  It is the place where many of the
experimental weapons of war in the Imperial arsenal are built.  As
expected, it is also the scene of many explosions as the engineers
here are not quite as careful as they are innovative.  The Imperial
Guild, in fact, likes to point out that they are far more daring and
experimental than their Dwarf counterparts.  The Imperials do not
point out that they also have more fatalities.  For more information
on the Imperial Engineer Guild of Altdorf (and the Empire), see
Warpstone #20.


*****Sidebar*****

Sidebar: Flooding and the culverts under Altdorf

Until the reign of Emperor Sigismund the Conqueror, the people of
Reikdorf (as Altdorf was known before its renaming) experienced
periodic bouts of flooding.  Emperor Sigismund was determined to solve
that problem for all time.

Using the skills of the Dwarf Engineers under his command, Sigismund
had the Dwarfs build two large culverts to channel the excess waters
from the Reik and Talabec safely under the city to the portion of the
Reik north of the city.  The project was ambitious and the Dwarfs did
not complete their work until the reign of Sigismund’s son, Siegfried
the Lawgiver.

From the grated opening outside the eastern wall, the Talabec culvert
is believed to flow beneath the Metallschlack and Werksviertal
districts before winding its way under the University and Friedwang
districts.  The Reik culvert starts outside the south wall and passes
under the Cathedral and Palace.  It returns to the Reik near the
Weissbrück Canal.

Under the reign of Emperor Wilhelm II, the Imperial Engineer Guild was
given the task of constructing a sewer system for Altdorf.  Wilhelm
believed that the effort to channel sewage underneath the streets –
rather than on them – might well improve the sanitation of the city.
The Imperial Engineer Guild used the Dwarf-built culverts as the main
sewer lines and constructed extensions from these.

During their efforts, portions of some tunnels collapsed and the
Imperial engineers were forced to re-route some sewer lines.  Dwarf
engineers who have seen the efforts of the Imperials comment that the
whole of Altdorf is riddled with these warrens and it might well be
the next tunnel that will cause a monumental collapse of the city.

There are rumours that some of the tunnels have breached long buried
chambers and other ruins of historical Altdorf, possibly as far back
as when the settlement was known as Reikdorf.

Unfortunately for the districts south of the Talabec, the funding for
the sewer project ran out before the Imperial engineers could do more
than construct a few tunnels.

*****End Sidebar*****


East End Districts


Reikerbahn

The Reikerbahn is the westernmost of the East End districts and one
that has an ill-favoured reputation.  The harbour on this side of
Altdorf is in poorer repair than the one in Niederhafen.  Most of the
smuggled goods coming into and going out of Altdorf comes from this
district.  When night falls, the Reikerbahn becomes a very dangerous
place to wander alone.  One of the smaller streets in this district is
Geblenz Strasse, which is unkindly referred to by the locals as the
Street of the Assassins.

The reputation of the Altdorf Sanitarium [65] is not a wholesome one.
This “Home for the Mentally Deficient” was once run by the cult of
Shallya.  Unfortunately, the kind-hearted and gentle touch of the cult
resulted in to many accidents and fatalities.  The cult of Sigmar took
over the governance of the Sanitarium and appointed a Commissioner,
Doktor Dietrich Holzfäller, to oversee its administration and the care
of its “guests.”

Up a small hill from the Sanitarium is the Necropolis [66].  This
graveyard is old with a number of ornate gravestones and mausoleums on
its grounds.  The creepiness of the grounds is further accentuated
whenever the Altdorf fog rolls off the Reik and Talabec.  The
Necropolis sits just high enough to look over the thick mist that
covers the streets of the Imperial city.  As with other graveyards, a
small shrine of Mórr watches over the hallowed grounds.


Sindelfingen

Open sewers mark the Sindelfingen [A] district.  It is both here and
in the neighbouring Drecksack Slums where members of the Muckrakers
Guild make their living.  The Muckrakers gather up the contents of
chamber pots to ferry down to the tanneries at night as well as remove
other wastes from the streets.  Most of the latter are dump a distance
to the east near the borders with Talabecland.

Most of Altdorf’s working poor lives within the confines of the
Sindelfingen.  This is considered an improvement over the
neighbourhood to the east.

Since the Great Fire of 2431, a large area of blackened glass has
separated the Bright College [67] from the neighbouring slums.  The
building is a large squared-shaped structure made of dark red bricks.
A tall tower rises from each corner of the College, each topped with a
pillar of flame.  For more information on the Bright College, see
Realms of Sorcery, pages 43-44.


Drecksack Slums

The Drecksack Slums [B] is the easternmost of the East End districts.
The people who live in the squalor of the Slums are the most wretched
and desperate people in the entire city.  Many of the derelicts here
have no jobs and depend heavily on the Shallyan soup kitchens.
Disease festers in this district and most people with sense shun the
Slums as they would any warren filled with plague-infested vermin.


Morrwies

Morrwies is also known as “Mórr Town” as much for the large cemetery
as for the Chapel of Mórr and the Crematorium.  Few people, other than
the priests of Mórr and members of the Mourners’ Guild, make their
residence in this district.

The Raven and Portal Tavern [68] is favoured by the priests of Mórr
and members of the Mourners’ Guild and visiting Raven Knights.  The
lively atmosphere here is a contrast to the sombre mood which seems to
prevail over the district.  A popular saying in the district is “one
cannot truly enjoy life unless they’ve been around the alternative.”
Not surprisingly, gallows humour is a favourite among the residents.

The Chapel of Morr & Crematorium [69] seem an odd mix for the cult of
Mórr.  Generally, the cult inters the decease into the ground after
the appropriate funereal rites are performed.  The wars against the
Undead in the 22nd century and the lack of space in Altdorf forced the
cult to revise some of their burial practices.  The wealthy and
well-connected dead are still buried or interred into family crypts
and mausoleums.  Paupers are buried in sections of the Morrwies
(Commoner’s) Graveyard [70] for a specific amount of time.  When the
remains are exhumed, they are taken to the fires of the crematorium
where they are reduced to ash.  The ashes are then cast into the Reik
with the proper prayer to Mórr.

Situated against the southern walls, the Amethyst College [71] is
built with curved walls of dark-grey stone.  It has few windows, only
two towers.  The doors of the school are always ajar, seemingly ready
to trap the unwary.  The College overlooks the Commoner’s Graveyard,
which causes some tension with the nearby Chapel of Mórr.  For more
information on the Amethyst College, see Realms of Sorcery, pages
50-53.


*****Sidebar*****

Sidebar: Mundsen Keep

An old and dirty castle south of the city walls goes by the name of
Mundsen Keep. It serves as the largest jail for the city of Altdorf,
and is the home of all sorts of criminals serving long terms of
imprisonment, from the tradesman gone broke to the worst of murderers.
Those who go to their place of execution in the Königplatz do so
bounded to a pole on a small skiff which is towed by a river barge
down river.  The barge is painted black so that all who see the
condemned can hurriedly find their place at the square for the best
viewing.  From the docks, the condemned is placed on a small cart and
led to their final destination.

Mundsen Keep is a filthy and reeking place, the only decent quarters
being the apartments of the infamous Governor Van Zandt way up above
the filth in the top of the central tower.

*****End Sidebar*****

